{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff13\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset204 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset204 Times;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset204 Courier;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}
{\f7\fnil\fcharset0 MT Extra;}
{\f8\fnil\fcharset238 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f9\fnil\fcharset238 Times;}
{\f10\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f11\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f12\fnil\fcharset238 Courier;}
{\f13\fnil\fcharset0 Times;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f15\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f16\fnil\fcharset0 Courier;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\fs20\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s1\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2048 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li512 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2560 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li1024 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li1536 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 part;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was sample2e.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 1.9.17 (released Sep 20 2007) on Mon Jan 14 03:21:30 2008
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f13\fs20\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl2680\margr2700\margt2540\margb1760\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f13\aftnnar
{
\par\pard\qc {\fs30 \pard\qc\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 An Example Document}
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 Leslie Lamport}
\par\pard\qc {\fs24 January 21, 1994}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 This is an example input file. Comparing it with the output it generates can show you how to produce a simple document of your own.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 1  Ordinary Text\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The ends of words and sentences are marked by spaces. It doesn\rquote t matter how many spaces you type; one is as good as 100. The end of a line counts as a space.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 One or more blank lines denote the end of a paragraph. \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Since any number of consecutive spaces are treated like a single one, the formatting of the input file makes no difference to {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X}, but it makes a difference to you. When you use {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X}, making your input file as easy to read as possible will be a great help as you write your document and when you change it. This sample file shows how you can add comments to your own input file.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Because printing is different from typewriting, there are a number of things that you have to do differently when preparing an input file than if you were just typing the document directly. Quotation marks like \ldblquote this\rdblquote  have to be handled specially, as do quotes within quotes: \ldblquote {\fs6  }\lquote this\rquote  is what I just wrote, not \lquote that\rquote {\fs6  }\rdblquote . \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Dashes come in three sizes: an intra-word dash, a medium dash for number ranges like 1\endash 2, and a punctuation dash\emdash like this.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 A sentence-ending space should be larger than the space between words within a sentence. You sometimes have to type special commands in conjunction with punctuation characters to get this right, as in the following sentence. Gnats, gnus, etc. all begin with G. You should check the spaces after periods when reading your output to make sure you haven\rquote t forgotten any special cases. Generating an ellipsis \u8230\'85 with the right spacing around the periods requires a special command.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X} interprets some common characters as commands, so you must type special commands to generate them. These characters include the following: $ & % # \{ and \}.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 In printing, text is usually emphasized with an {\i italic} type style. \par
{\i \pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 A long segment of text can also be emphasized in this way. Text within such a segment can be given {\i0\b0\scaps0 additional} emphasis. }\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 It is sometimes necessary to prevent {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X} from breaking a line where it might otherwise do so. This may be at a space, as between the \ldblquote Mr.\rdblquote  and \ldblquote Jones\rdblquote  in \ldblquote Mr.\~Jones\rdblquote , or within a word\emdash especially when the word is a symbol like {{\i itemnum}} that makes little sense when hyphenated across lines.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 Footnotes{\up16\chftn}
{\*\footnote \pard\plain\s246\f13\fs20 {\up16\chftn}This is an example of a footnote.}
 pose no problem.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi300 {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X} is good at typesetting mathematical formulas like {{{\i x}{\f6\'2D}3{\i y}+{\i z}=7}} or {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {{\i a}\\s\\do5({\fs16 1})>{\i x}\\s\\up5({\fs16 2{\i n}})+{\i y}\\s\\up5({\fs16 2{\i n}})>{\i x}'}}}{\fldrslt }}} or {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {({\i A}\\,{\i B})= \\i \\su({\i i},, ){\i a}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}}){\i b}\\s\\do5({\fs16 {\i i}})}}}{\fldrslt }}}. The spaces you type in a formula are ignored. Remember that a letter like {{{\i x}}} is a formula when it denotes a mathematical symbol, and it should be typed as one.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 {\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 2  Displayed Text\par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Text is displayed by indenting it from the left margin. Quotations are commonly displayed. There are short quotations {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li512\ri512\fi0 This is a short a quotation. It consists of a single paragraph of text. See how it is formatted. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 and longer ones. {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li512\ri512\fi0 This is a longer quotation. It consists of two paragraphs of text, neither of which are particularly interesting.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li512\ri512\fi0 This is the second paragraph of the quotation. It is just as dull as the first paragraph. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Another frequently-displayed structure is a list. The following is an example of an {\i itemized} list. {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab This is the first item of an itemized list. Each item in the list is marked with a \ldblquote tick\rdblquote . You don\rquote t have to worry about what kind of tick mark is used.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab This is the second item of the list. It contains another list nested inside it. The inner list is an {\i enumerated} list. {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 1.\tab This is the first item of an enumerated list that is nested within the itemized list.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li1200\fi-300 2.\tab This is the second item of the inner list. {\plain L{\up5\fs16 A}T{\dn6 E}X} allows you to nest lists deeper than you really should. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li600\fi0 This is the rest of the second item of the outer list. It is no more interesting than any other part of the item. \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab This is the third item of the list. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 You can even display poetry. {\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li1134\fi0 There is an environment for verse \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li1134\fi0 Whose features some poets will curse. \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li1134\fi0 For instead of making\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li1134\fi0 Them do {\i all} line breaking, \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \li1134\fi0 It allows them to put too many words on a line when they\rquote d rather be forced to be terse. \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi300 Mathematical formulas may also be displayed. A displayed formula is one-line long; multiline formulas require special formatting instructions. \par\par
\pard\tqc\tx3450\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ {({\f6\u-4025\'47}\\,{\f6\u-3975\'79}')={\i x}''+{\i y}\\s\\up5({\fs16 2})+{\i z}\\s\\up({\fs16 {\i n},{\i i}})}}}{\fldrslt }}\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Don\rquote t start a paragraph with a displayed equation, nor make one a paragraph by itself.\par
}}
